Spatial raster prep (#7)
ninoxconsulting/r-telemetry-workshop-nov-2023: 06-raster-data.qmd

title: "Exploring Raster Data"
---

## Overview:

> In this module we will explore rasters data and the available datasets which can be used through R for analysis We will:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this module we will explore raster data, and the available datasets which can be used in R for analysis. We will:
```

> -   prepare our study aoi to use with rasters

Reviewer: This is done now in previous module (I think)

Author: outdated

-   extract DEM data through the **bcmaps** package

-   generate DEM derived covariates,

-   prepare a raster stack with all spatial layers generated to date.

## Background: Rasters

> Raster data is information built on standard grid. These can be characterised by the grid extent (xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax) and can have a coordinate system to orient them in space. Rasters are made up of cells or pixals, based on a resolution or cell size. Each cell contains a single value. The **terra** package contains many function for manipulating and processing rasters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Raster data is information built on a standard grid. These can be characterised by the grid extent (xmin, xmax, ymin, ymax) and can have a coordinate system to orient them in space. Rasters are made up of cells or pixels, based on a resolution or cell size. Each cell contains a single value. The **terra** package contains many functions for manipulating and processing rasters.
```

Note we will be using the BC Albers coordinate reference system (EPSG:3005). The advantages of this are 1) BCAlbers is an equal area projection across BC, 2) extent is marked using meters.

## 1. Create a standard raster template.

For ease of calculations we will create a standard "template" raster which will form the basis for all our data analysis.

> ```{r, eval = FALSE}

Reviewer: I think we can make most of these `eval = TRUE` so that the website has the rendered content...

# read in the libraries needed

library(dplyr)
library(sf)
library(bcmaps)
library(terra)

```

> Read in our basic aoi and extend it to the nearest 100m. We can then convert this to a raster with a resolution of given size. In this example we will select 25m.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Read in our AOI that we made and saved previously. We can then convert this to a raster with a resolution of given size. In this example we will select 25m.
```

trim_raw <- bcmaps::cded_terra(aoi)

# lets look at the raster
trim_raw
res(trim_raw)

# note this is in WGS so we need to convert to 3005
# reproject to match our raster template crs and extent

trim_3005 <- project(trim_raw, template)

# write out the individual raster
terra::writeRaster(trim_3005, file.path("clean_data", "dem.tif"), overwrite = TRUE) 

```

## 3. Generate DEM derived covariates

Now we can use the terrain functions within the terra package to generate some standard base layers derived from the DEM.

```{r, eval = FALSE}

# generate slope 
rslope <- terra::terrain(trim_3005, v = "slope", neighbors = 8, unit = "degrees") 

# generate aspect
aspect <- terra::terrain(trim_3005, v = "aspect", neighbors = 8,  unit = "degrees") 

# generate topographic roughness index
tri <- terra::terrain(trim_3005, v = "TRI", neighbors = 8)

# create a raster stack
rstack <- c(trim_3005, rslope, aspect, tri)

plot(rstack)

# write our the individual rasters

#terra::writeRaster(rslope, file.path(out_path, "slope.tif"), overwrite = TRUE) 
#terra::writeRaster(aspect , file.path(out_path, "aspect.tif"), overwrite = TRUE) 

> #terra::writeRaster(tri , file.path(out_path, "tri.tif"), overwrite = TRUE) 

Reviewer: `out_path` is not defined. Also, I think we can uncomment these?

Author: good catch ps should we use 
''' file.path(cleandata/slope.tif")'''  
or 
'''file.path("clean_data", "slope.tif"'''

Reviewer: I would say `file.path("clean_data", "slope.tif"`?

```

## Bonus Questions.

1.  Explore what other covariates you can generate using the **terra::terrain** function. Hint use **?terrain** to bring up a help file.

> 2.  Compare outputs of aspect which the neighbours parameter is adjusted. What difference does this make to the output and the time to process?

Reviewer: I'm not really sure what this question is asking
